So now that we know what a rest API generally is or which problem it solves,
let me give you a big picture of how it works.
We have a client in the server and the client is a mobile app or our single page application, on the server
we build our API.
So here we build an API for these apps we might be building
and one advantage by the way is that we can use one and the same API for multiple clients.
So we might be building a web app and a mobile app, not that uncommon these days,
most companies have mobile apps and web apps but we can use one and the same API because both apps, mobile
and web app use the same data of course,
they might present it differently and that is what I was talking about, about the user interface being
handled by the frontend, by the client.
They might present it differently but they work with the same data,
so that is our API we might be building or we have any kind of app including our traditional web app
which just needs a service API or we might be building our own service API, maybe to also sell our service.
Maybe we're building a stock API where any application which we might not even know is able to query
data from
and we just sell access to that API and that is our business model.
So in all these cases, we obviously exchange something and this something we exchange is data
as I mentioned before, only the data not the user interface. And that of course leads us to one important
question, in which format do we exchange that data?
We learned about html thus far but there are different kinds of data we could attach to a request and
a response. We can send plain text for example, we could send xml or we could send json and there
are other formats too
but these are some well-known formats. Html of course look something like this so we can send
html code and this is what we did thus far in the course. When we rendered an ejs view, what we essentially
did is we sent html code to the browser because the view was rendered on the server and the result
of that rendering process simply was a html page, simply was html code,
so this is how we could send data. Html code contains both the data and the structure of course, the
html elements, the css styles we might be adding, that all adds structure and design and what
is between the html elements is our data.
So therefore this also contains our user interface,
it defines how our user interface should look like.
Now the problem is of course that if we just want the data, we got all the overhead html content,
it's unnecessarily difficult to parse because even though the html elements are of course kind of defined
and regulated, how we use them and how we well structure our document is not really enforced onto us,
so its unnecessarily difficult to parse
if we just need the data. We can of course send plain text,
the thing here is this is only data of course, there is no structure,
there is no design element added and therefore, we make no UI
and that is user interface of course, we make no UI assumptions.
Still if you want to transfer data like this, it's unnecessarily difficult to parse because text is easy
to understand for humans but for computers, it isn't,
there is no clear pattern in the text and therefore this is not really a great way of exchanging data.
Xml looks a lot like html and actually html is a special kind of xml you could say, the difference is
xml allows you to use any tags
and this of course allows you to transfer data
and it's also not making any UI assumptions because it's not parsable by the browser,
the xml elements are totally made up by you.
The good thing is it's easier to read by machines than plain text,
you can also of course define clear structures there but you will need a special xml parser because traversing
through an xml node tree is kind of challenging, not impossible to solve but you need a special parser
and all these elements of course add some overhead to the data you transfer,
so there's a lot of extra text that is only required to read your data
that is not really your core data though.
The last data format and you might already guess it, that will be our winner is json. Looks like this
and we already use that in the course when I had a look at asynchronous requests
couple of modules ago. And now this also is just the data,
it makes no UI assumptions and it's also machine readable.
The good thing is it's a bit more concise than xml
and it can easily be converted to javascript and that is of course a huge plus when working with nodejs
on the server
but also with well javascript in the browser which happens to be our only programming language we can
use there.
So therefore this is our winner data format, json is our winner data format
if we just want to transfer data and it's the most common format in any API you are communicating with
these days. All the other formats are not as great for transmitting data as
json is, therefore this is what we will use
but it's important for you to understand why we use it and I hope this became clear.